.TH SPLITDNSD 8 "2026-06-16" "splitdns" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
splitdnsd \- lightweight split-horizon DNS resolver for the local LAN
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B splitdnsd
.RB [ \-config
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-check\-config ]
.RB [ \-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B splitdnsd
is a standalone authoritative/forwarding DNS server for a trusted LAN. It
resolves
.I *.local
hosts via mDNS, answers reverse (PTR) queries for the site's locally managed
address spaces, and forwards everything else to upstream public resolvers over DoT.
Optionally, it mirrors zones hosted on Cloudflare and serves them authoritatively on
the LAN, preferring direct internal addresses over proxy/tunnel/SSO indirection; the
Cloudflare integration is not required for the forwarding and local-name features.
.PP
The query-answering hot path performs no external I/O: it reads an
immutable, atomically published snapshot, so a slow or unreachable Cloudflare,
upstream, or mDNS peer can never wedge resolution.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-config " path"
Path to the TOML configuration file. Default
.IR /etc/splitdns/splitdnsd.toml .
A missing file is not an error; built-in defaults apply. See
.BR splitdns.conf (5).
.TP
.B \-check\-config
Load and validate the configuration, print the resolved listen-address set, the
access allow/refuse lists, and the resolved reverse zones, then exit. Use this
before (re)starting the service to confirm the effective policy.
.TP
.B \-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH "ACCESS AND LISTEN POLICY"
By default
.B splitdnsd
binds only local-scope addresses (RFC 1918, ULA, loopback, link-local) and never
global-unicast addresses, which are more likely to leak through the firewall, and
it answers queries only from private/local clients. Both are configurable; see
.BR splitdns.conf (5).
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Normal termination, or a successful
.BR \-check\-config / \-version .
.TP
.B 2
Configuration could not be loaded, validated, or resolved.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/splitdns/splitdnsd.toml
Configuration file. See
.BR splitdns.conf (5).
.TP
.I /etc/splitdns/secrets/
Scoped Cloudflare API tokens referenced by the config (e.g.
.IR cf-read.token " for the mirror, " cf-edit.token " for dynamic-DNS write-back);"
the exact paths are set by \fBread_token_file\fR / \fBedit_token_file\fR.
.TP
.I /var/lib/splitdns
Versioned-JSON warm-start cache.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR splitdns.conf (5),
.BR splitdns-notify (8),
.BR systemd.service (5)
.SH AUTHORS
The splitdns authors.
