.TH SPLITDNS-NOTIFY 8 "2026-06-25" "splitdns" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
splitdns\-notify \- announce a public\-IP change to the splitdns resolver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B splitdns\-notify
.RI [ flags ]
.I hostname
.IR addr " ..."
.br
.B splitdns\-notify \-\-genkey
.RI [ name ]
.br
.B splitdns\-notify \-\-listen
.br
.B splitdns\-notify \-\-relay
.I socket hostname
.IR addr " ..."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B splitdns\-notify
sends a one\-shot multicast\-DNS announcement that
.IR hostname .local.
now has the given IPv4/IPv6 addresses. The
.BR splitdnsd (8)
resolver receives the announcement through its mDNS source and, when dynamic\-DNS
write\-back is enabled, mirrors the change to the matching non\-proxied Cloudflare
records for that host (see the
.B [ddns]
section of
.BR splitdns.conf (5)).
.PP
This is the supported way to drive dynamic\-DNS updates: a trusted process that
knows a public address just changed \(em a DHCP\-client hook, a PPP up\-script, a
router event \(em invokes
.B splitdns\-notify
with the new address. The announcement itself is the authorization; only hosts an
operator chooses to trigger are ever updated.
.PP
The
.I hostname
may be given bare, or with a
.RB \(dq .local \(dq
or
.RB \(dq .local. \(dq
suffix; it is normalized to a single\-label
.RB \(dq .local. \(dq
name. Addresses may be separate arguments or space\-separated within one argument;
each must be a valid IP literal or the command fails.
.PP
On the resolver host the announcement is delivered first over the authenticated
local unix socket
.RB ( \-socket ,
default
.IR /run/splitdns/notify.sock ),
which the daemon authorizes with a peer\-credential check \(em this is the trusted
path that may trigger write\-back regardless of
.BR [ddns].trusted_sources .
It is also sent as an ordinary authoritative mDNS response (no privileged source
port is needed) by unicast to every configured resolver and, unless
.B \-no\-multicast
is given, multicast to the link\-local mDNS groups
.RB ( 224.0.0.251 " and " ff02::fb )
on each multicast\-capable interface. Delivery is best\-effort, matching mDNS.
.SS Authenticating off\-box triggers (TSIG)
Delivery is fire\-and\-forget UDP, so it can never block on a slow or down resolver, but
a bare UDP announcement is trusted to TRIGGER write\-back only when its source address is
listed in
.BR [ddns].trusted_sources ,
and a source address can be spoofed. To authenticate a trigger cryptographically without
a round\-trip, configure a shared TSIG key (RFC 8945): the announcement is then
HMAC\-signed and
.BR splitdnsd (8)
honors it regardless of source IP. Signing is opt\-in \(em with no key configured the
helper still works (socket, then multicast). Set the key under
.B [notify]
in the config file
.RB ( tsig_key ", " tsig_secret " or " tsig_secret_file ),
and list the same key under
.B [ddns].tsig_keys
on the resolver. Generate a matching pair with
.BR \-\-genkey .
.SH FLAGS
.TP
.BI \-socket " path"
Authenticated unix socket on the local resolver, tried before the UDP paths. Overrides
.B [notify].socket
in the config file; default
.I /run/splitdns/notify.sock
(which matches the resolver's
.BR [ddns].notify_socket ).
.TP
.B \-no\-socket
Do not attempt the local authenticated unix socket; use UDP only.
.TP
.BI \-server " host[:port]"
Unicast resolver target (default port \fB5353\fR). May be repeated. When given,
overrides the configuration file. When omitted, targets are read from
.B [notify]
.B servers
in the config file.
.TP
.BI \-config " path"
Configuration file consulted for the
.B [notify]
table (resolver
.BR servers " and the " tsig_* " signing key)."
When omitted, the helper searches
.I /etc/splitdns/notify.toml
then
.IR /etc/splitdns/splitdnsd.toml .
A missing or unreadable file is not fatal; the command falls back to flags and its
socket/multicast defaults.
.TP
.BI \-tsig\-key " name"
Sign announcements with the named TSIG key, overriding the config. The secret is taken
from the config or
.BR \-tsig\-secret\-file ;
it is never accepted on the command line (so it cannot leak via the process list).
.TP
.BI \-tsig\-secret\-file " path"
Read the base64 TSIG secret from
.IR path ,
overriding the config secret.
.TP
.B \-no\-tsig
Do not sign even if a TSIG key is configured (send an unsigned announcement).
.TP
.BR \-verbose ", " \-v
Explain what is sent and how: which config file (if any) was used, whether the
announcement was signed and with which key, the resolved targets, and the per\-path
result. Diagnostic output goes to standard error.
.TP
.BI \-port " n"
mDNS UDP port for every target. Default \fB5353\fR.
.TP
.BI \-ttl " seconds"
Advertised record TTL. Default \fB120\fR. Raise it (e.g.
.B \-ttl 86400
) if a receiver relies on a long cache lifetime.
.TP
.B \-cache\-flush
Set the mDNS cache\-flush bit (RFC 6762) so receivers replace any prior records for
the name instead of adding to them.
.TP
.B \-no\-multicast
Do not announce to the multicast groups; send only to the unicast targets.
.TP
.B \-quiet
Suppress per\-target progress and soft\-error messages.
.TP
.BI \-\-genkey " [name]"
Generate a fresh random TSIG key (hmac\-sha256) and print copy\-paste configuration for
both ends \(em the
.B [notify]
block for this host and the
.B [ddns].tsig_keys
entry for the resolver \(em then exit. The optional
.I name
defaults to
.IR splitdns-notify .
The secret is printed once and never written to disk, so the operator places it
deliberately (ideally a mode\-0400 file referenced by
.BR tsig_secret_file ).
.TP
.B \-\-listen
Run as a relay daemon instead of announcing once: read
.RI \(dq hostname " " addr ...\(dq
lines (one datagram each) from a unix socket and announce each, reusing the signing and
delivery configuration above. The socket comes from systemd socket activation when present
(the packaged
.B splitdns\-notify\-relay.socket
unit), otherwise from
.BR \-\-listen\-socket .
See
.BR "RELAY MODE" .
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-socket " path"
With
.B \-\-listen
and no systemd socket activation, create and read a unixgram socket at
.IR path .
.TP
.BI \-\-relay " socket"
Client mode: send the
.RI \(dq hostname " " addr ...\(dq
arguments as one datagram to a relay
.I socket
and exit. Uses no configuration or keys and never touches the network, so an unprivileged
process (a DHCP lease hook) can trigger a signed announce without holding any credentials
and without a
.BR socat (1)
dependency.
.SH "RELAY MODE"
With
.B \-\-listen
the helper becomes a small socket\-activated relay: it reads
.RI \(dq hostname " " addr ...\(dq
datagrams and performs the signed announce for each. An unprivileged local process reaches
it with
.B splitdns\-notify \-\-relay
.IR socket " " hostname " " addr ...,
so the announce credential (the TSIG key) lives only in the relay, never in the caller.
.PP
The package ships this as
.B splitdns\-notify\-relay.socket
(a datagram socket at
.IR /run/splitdns\-notify/lease\-relay.sock ", mode 0660, group " splitdns\-notify )
and
.BR splitdns\-notify\-relay.service .
Add a writer's service user to the
.B splitdns\-notify
group to authorize it. A ready\-to\-edit Kea DHCP lease hook using this path is installed at
.IR /usr/share/doc/splitdns\-notify/kea\-notify\-hook.sh .
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
At least one target was transmitted to.
.TP
.B 1
Every target failed at the local socket layer (e.g. address resolution or no
route). Note that because announcements are fire\-and\-forget UDP, a target whose
remote port is closed still counts as transmitted.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: missing arguments or an invalid address.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Announce a new public IPv6 prefix for a host, to a specific resolver:
.PP
.RS
.B splitdns\-notify \-server 192.0.2.53 edge 2001:db8:1234:5600::42
.RE
.PP
From a DHCP exit hook, announce the freshly leased WAN address (resolver taken from
the config file):
.PP
.RS
.B splitdns\-notify "$interface" "$new_ip_address"
.RE
.PP
Mint a TSIG key, then see exactly what an announcement does (signed or not):
.PP
.RS
.B splitdns\-notify \-\-genkey edge\-router
.br
.B splitdns\-notify \-v edge 203.0.113.45
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR splitdnsd (8),
.BR splitdns.conf (5)
.SH AUTHORS
The splitdns authors.
