.TH SPLITDNS.CONF 5 "2026-06-16" "splitdns" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
splitdnsd.toml \- configuration file for splitdnsd(8)
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B splitdnsd
daemon reads a TOML configuration file (default
.IR /etc/splitdns/splitdnsd.toml )
layered over built-in defaults. Any key may be omitted to accept its default.
Unknown keys are rejected so typos fail loudly rather than silently doing
nothing. Validate a file with
.RB \(dq "splitdnsd \-check\-config" \(dq.
.PP
The file is organized into tables. Each is described below with its keys, types,
and defaults.
.SH "[listen]"
Controls which local addresses the :53 server binds.
.TP
.B mode
String. \fB"private-auto"\fR (default) binds only local-scope addresses
(RFC 1918, ULA, loopback, link-local) and never global addresses.
\fB"explicit"\fR binds exactly the addresses in \fBaddresses\fR.
.TP
.B addresses
Array of \fIhost:port\fR strings. Required when \fBmode = "explicit"\fR. As with
\fB[diag].addr\fR, the host pins the address family: \fB0.0.0.0\fR binds IPv4 only,
\fB[::]\fR binds IPv6 only, and an empty host binds both.
.TP
.B port
Integer. UDP/TCP port. Default \fB53\fR.
.TP
.B udp ", " tcp
Booleans. Enable the UDP and TCP listeners. Both default \fBtrue\fR; at least
one must be enabled.
.SH "[access]"
Query access policy. \fBrefuse\fR takes precedence over \fBallow\fR.
.TP
.B allow
Array of CIDRs permitted to query. Default: all private/local ranges
(\fB10.0.0.0/8\fR, \fB172.16.0.0/12\fR, \fB192.168.0.0/16\fR, \fB127.0.0.0/8\fR,
\fB169.254.0.0/16\fR, \fBfc00::/7\fR, \fB::1/128\fR, \fBfe80::/10\fR). Narrow it to
specific subnets if you prefer.
.TP
.B refuse
Array of CIDRs always denied, overriding \fBallow\fR. Default empty.
.SH "[upstream]"
Forwarding of non-local queries.
.TP
.B servers
Array of \fIhost:port\fR upstream resolvers (DoT). Default
\fB["1.1.1.1", "8.8.8.8"]\fR (each host becomes a DoT endpoint on port 853).
.TP
.B cleartext_fallback
Boolean. Permit an audited one-shot cleartext retry when DoT fails. Default
\fBfalse\fR.
.TP
.B breaker
Boolean. Enable the per-upstream circuit breaker: an upstream that is down (several
consecutive failures) or flapping (a high failure ratio over a rolling window) is
skipped so queries fail over to a healthy upstream without paying its timeout. It
fails open \(em if every upstream is tripped it still tries them \(em so it is never
worse than no breaker. Recovery is probed after a short cooldown. Default \fBtrue\fR.
.SH "[zones]"
Authoritative inventory.
.TP
.B local
Array of Cloudflare-hosted zone names served from the local mirror.
.TP
.B reverse
Array of \fIstable\fR reverse-zone apexes the server is authoritative for. Reverse
names are octet/nibble-reversed: \fB192.168.0.0/16\fR is \fB168.192.in-addr.arpa.\fR,
and \fB2001:db8::/32\fR is \fB8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa.\fR A reverse
zone covers all internal subnetting, so list the enclosing space (a managed
\fB10.0.0.0/16\fR carved into /24s needs only \fB0.10.in-addr.arpa.\fR). All PTR
queries outside the resolved zones are forwarded.
.TP
.B reverse_detect
String scope of address spaces to additionally \fIauto-detect\fR from local
interfaces and \fBre-detect on network change\fR: \fB"off"\fR (default),
\fB"private"\fR (RFC 1918 + ULA), \fB"global"\fR (global-unicast only), or
\fB"all"\fR. Use \fB"global"\fR to track a DYNAMIC ISP-assigned GUA prefix that may
change over time. A detected zone contained within an explicit \fBreverse\fR zone
is dropped (so a more-specific detected zone never shadows a stable one), and a
prefix not on an octet (IPv4) or nibble (IPv6) boundary is refused and reported,
never guessed.
.PP
.RS
.B Note:
auto-detection keys off the interface prefix length; IPv6 SLAAC interfaces are
usually /64, so detection can under-represent a managed /48. List stable spaces
explicitly in \fBreverse\fR and reserve \fBreverse_detect\fR for genuinely dynamic
spaces such as the ISP-assigned GUA.
.RE
.SH "[zones.stub]"
A table mapping a delegated subtree apex (FQDN, trailing dot) to an array of stub
resolver \fIhost:port\fR addresses, e.g.
.RB \(dq "\(dqsub.example.com.\(dq = [\(dq192.0.2.53:53\(dq]" \(dq.
.SH "[mdns]"
The LAN plane: the mDNS view served over unicast, and how long records survive.
.TP
.B local_domain
Bare label of a unicast local domain served from the mDNS view alongside the
always-on \fI*.local\fR (default \fBlan\fR). \fIhost.lan\fR then resolves like
\fIhost.local\fR \(em useful for clients that accept only a single search domain.
Reverse (PTR) for a LAN address returns one canonical name under this domain,
preferring a real hostname over a machine id when several claim the address. Empty
serves \fI*.local\fR only.
.TP
.B stale_grace
Serve-stale window (Go duration, default \fB30m\fR; \fB0\fR disables). The cache is a
passive listener that expires a record at its announced mDNS TTL; if an announcer
re-broadcasts more slowly than that TTL, the last value keeps being served for this
long so hosts do not blink out between announcements. The served DNS TTL is capped
short while stale. See also \fBsplitdns\-notify\fR(8) \fB\-ttl\fR.
.TP
.B goodbye_grace
Cushion kept after an explicit mDNS goodbye (Go duration, default \fB5m\fR) instead of
removing the host instantly, so a transient bounce \(em an avahi restart, or an mDNS
reflector that briefly loses a sleeping device \(em followed by a re-announce is seamless.
.TP
.B service_discovery
Active DNS-SD discovery (boolean, default \fBtrue\fR). When on, splitdnsd multicasts the
standard Bonjour service-discovery query so quiet devices (printers, casts, home speakers),
their services (type, port) and TXT model/name are captured for the diagnostics console.
Querying is \fBon-demand\fR: it runs only while the diagnostics console is open (each poll
pokes it, throttled to the discovery interval), so there is zero active multicast when
nobody is watching. Set \fBfalse\fR to remain a pure passive listener and never query;
\fBsplitdns\-notify\fR-proxied hosts (which advertise no services) are unaffected either way.
.TP
.B resolve_on_demand
On-demand resolution (boolean, default \fBtrue\fR). When a client asks for an unknown local
host, splitdnsd sends a targeted mDNS query and waits briefly, so a quiet device (not
currently announcing) is found on first ask instead of returning NXDOMAIN. Heavily bounded:
a global outbound rate limit (10/s, burst 20), a per-client limit (5/s), an in-flight cap
(64), and recently-queried suppression; it \fBnever\fR queries a managed name (vhost / CF /
DDNS-eligible), so a solicited reply can never move a Cloudflare record. Counters are shown
in the diagnostics console. Trade-offs to be aware of: an unresolved lookup is multicast to
the LAN (and any mDNS reflector), disclosing looked-up names; mDNS answers are
unauthenticated, so an on-demand result is lower-assurance than a managed record (it
self-heals within \(<=120s and never overrides a managed name); under a flood of distinct
unknown names the daemon still emits up to the rate cap; and a just-booted host may return
NXDOMAIN for up to ~30s (the negative window) unless it announces itself first. Set
\fBfalse\fR to keep the pure "unknown \(-> NXDOMAIN" behavior with no active queries.
.TP
.B resolve_on_demand_wait
How long to wait for an on-demand reply (Go duration, default \fB300ms\fR; clamped to
50ms..2s). Longer catches a slower responder at the cost of a slower NXDOMAIN.
.TP
.B serve_dnssd
Serve DNS-SD over unicast (boolean, default \fBtrue\fR). Local names also answer
\fBSRV\fR/\fBTXT\fR/\fBPTR\fR synthesized from the passively-captured mDNS services, so a LAN
client can resolve or browse services (e.g. printers) by unicast \(em including across VLANs
where multicast does not reach. It is a read-only projection of the cache and \fBnever\fR
sends a query. Set \fBfalse\fR to serve only A/AAAA on the local domain.
.SH "[vhost]"
.TP
.B feed
\fIhost:port\fR of the reverse proxy's virtual-host feed (newline-separated names).
.TP
.B proxy_v4 ", " proxy_v6
Reverse-proxy addresses the naked domain, \fIwww\fR, and known virtual hosts are
redirected to. The proxy may be any product (nginx, Caddy, Traefik, \&...). With
neither set, the redirect is disabled and names are served authoritatively.
.TP
.B exclude_zones
Array of apex zone names that are \fInot\fR subject to the vhost/naked/www redirect;
they serve their real records (or flattened tunnel addresses) instead. Site-specific.
.SH "[cloudflare]"
.TP
.B read_token_file
Path to the read-only Cloudflare API token used by the mirror.
.TP
.B edit_token_file
Path to the DNS:Edit token used only by the dynamic-DNS writer. Empty disables
write-back entirely. Default empty.
.TP
.B base_url
Override the Cloudflare API base URL (used by the test harness). Default empty.
.TP
.B tunnel_suffixes
Array of CNAME-target suffixes flattened to the owner's real A/AAAA addresses.
Default: \fB["cfargotunnel.com"]\fR (Cloudflare Tunnel). Add others to flatten records
fronted by a different tunnel/proxy.
.SH "[ddns]"
Guarded dynamic-DNS write-back of public-IP changes to Cloudflare. Write-back is
\fIpush-driven\fR: a trusted process announces a host's new public address with
.BR splitdns-notify (8)
and the writer updates that host's non-proxied Cloudflare records. Two independent
guards authorize a write: the announcement must arrive on an authenticated trigger
path \(em a peer-cred-checked \fBnotify_socket\fR (allowed by uid via \fBnotify_uids\fR
or by group via \fBnotify_groups\fR), a valid \fBTSIG\fR signature (\fBtsig_keys\fR), or,
unless \fBrequire_signature\fR is set, a \fBtrusted_sources\fR address \(em and the host
must be on the \fBeligible\fR allowlist.
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean. Master switch. Default \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
.B dry_run
Boolean. When true, log intended edits without making them. Default \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
.B rate
Duration string (e.g. \fB"10m"\fR). Minimum interval between writes per host.
.TP
.B eligible
Array of host FQDNs. \fBRequired allowlist\fR for live writes: when empty (default)
the writer is forced to dry-run (deny-all); a non-empty list restricts write-back to
the named hosts.
.TP
.B trusted_sources
Array of CIDRs. \fIUnsigned\fR mDNS announcements whose \fIsource address\fR falls in
this set may \fItrigger\fR write-back; announcements from any other source still serve
.BR *.local
but never write. This is a weaker, source-IP-based trust (a source address can be
spoofed). Empty (default) means only \fBnotify_socket\fR or a signed announcement can
trigger DDNS.
.TP
.B tsig_keys
Array of shared HMAC keys (RFC 8945), each an inline table with \fBname\fR and either
\fBsecret\fR (base64) or \fBsecret_file\fR (path to a base64 secret; preferred \(em keep
the key out of this world-readable file, mode it \fB0400 splitdns:splitdns\fR). An
optional \fBalgorithm\fR defaults to \fBhmac-sha256\fR. An announcement carrying a valid
TSIG for one of these keys may trigger write-back \fIregardless of source IP\fR \(em
cryptographic authentication that cannot be spoofed, the recommended path for off-box
notifiers. Generate a key with \fBsplitdns-notify \-\-genkey\fR.
.TP
.B require_signature
Boolean. When true, only \fBTSIG\fR-signed (or \fBnotify_socket\fR) announcements may
trigger write-back; a \fBtrusted_sources\fR address alone no longer suffices. Default
\fBfalse\fR (back-compat). Recommended \fBtrue\fR for any exposed or multi-host
deployment.
.TP
.B notify_socket
Path to the authenticated local trigger channel. The daemon checks the connecting
peer's credentials via \fBSO_PEERCRED\fR. Empty disables it. Default
\fB/run/splitdns/notify.sock\fR.
.TP
.B notify_uids
Array of integer uids permitted to connect to \fBnotify_socket\fR, in addition to
root and the daemon's own uid (always allowed).
.TP
.B notify_groups
Array of group names whose members may trigger DDNS via \fBnotify_socket\fR with \fBno
shared key\fR. The daemon stamps a POSIX ACL on the socket granting these groups connect
rights (it owns the socket, so this needs no privilege and no group membership of its
own) and authorizes a connecting peer by group membership. Name a service's own group
(e.g. \fBwww-data\fR, \fBdhcp\fR) so that service can trigger immediately \(em no
\fBusermod\fR, no key. \fBNever\fR name \fBsplitdns\fR (its group also grants access to
\fI/etc/splitdns\fR and the secrets there) or a broad group such as \fBusers\fR.
Membership is resolved from the local group database (it does not see LDAP/SSS groups).
A filesystem without ACL support is logged and the option is skipped (DNS unaffected).
.TP
.B notify_socket_mode
Octal permission for \fBnotify_socket\fR. Default \fB"0660"\fR. Do not use \fB"0666"\fR:
it removes the filesystem gate and lets any local process flood the reject log.
.SH "[notify]"
Defaults for the
.BR splitdns-notify (8)
helper, which announces over up to three best-effort channels \(em all attempted when
enabled, none required: the local authenticated unix \fBsocket\fR (tried first), the
unicast \fBservers\fR below, and (unless \fB\-no\-multicast\fR) link-local multicast.
.TP
.B socket
Path to the resolver's authenticated unix socket the helper connects to (the trusted
DDNS-trigger path). Default \fB/run/splitdns/notify.sock\fR, which matches the resolver's
\fB[ddns].notify_socket\fR default \(em so a stock setup needs no socket configuration on
either side. If you change \fB[ddns].notify_socket\fR on the resolver, set this (or pass
\fB\-socket\fR) to match. The \fB\-socket\fR flag overrides this; \fB\-no\-socket\fR skips
the socket entirely.
.TP
.B servers
Array of \fIadditional\fR unicast resolver targets (\fIhost\fR or \fIhost:port\fR; default
port \fB5353\fR) an announcement is sent to when the caller passes no \fB\-server\fR flag.
These are independent of the socket and multicast: an empty list does NOT mean "no
delivery" \(em the socket and multicast are still used. Set it for resolvers on subnets
that multicast does not reach.
.TP
.BR tsig_key ", " tsig_secret ", " tsig_secret_file ", " tsig_algorithm
The TSIG key the helper SIGNS announcements with: a key \fBname\fR plus its base64
secret, given inline (\fBtsig_secret\fR) or, preferably, from a mode-0400 file
(\fBtsig_secret_file\fR). \fBtsig_algorithm\fR defaults to \fBhmac-sha256\fR. The same
key must appear under \fB[ddns].tsig_keys\fR on the resolver. On a host that only runs
.BR splitdns-notify (8)
these usually live in \fI/etc/splitdns/notify.toml\fR.
.SH "[diag]"
The diagnostics HTTP endpoint. Its read-only views (zone inventory, mDNS, answer-cache
stats, recent queries, busiest clients, upstream/backend health, worker stats) are
always available on GET; the page also self-updates. The DANGEROUS control actions are
off by default; see \fBallow_control\fR.
.PP
.RS
.B Note:
this is a LAN-grade convenience tool, not a hardened production surface \(em it is plain
HTTP with no built-in user authentication. For real/public deployments leave it on
loopback or a Unix socket behind an authenticating reverse proxy, or do not enable it.
.RE
.TP
.B addr
\fIhost:port\fR for the diagnostics HTTP endpoint, or a \fBUnix socket\fR. Keep it
localhost-only. Default \fB"127.0.0.1:8080"\fR. For host:port the host pins the address
family: an IPv4 literal including the \fB0.0.0.0\fR wildcard binds IPv4 ONLY, an IPv6
literal (including \fB[::]\fR) binds IPv6 only, and an empty host (\fB":8080"\fR)
binds both. This matters for \fB0.0.0.0\fR specifically: it is IPv4-only here, not
dual-stack. Alternatively, a value beginning with \fB/\fR or \fB@\fR, or a
\fBunix:/path\fR form, binds a Unix-domain socket (mode 0660) instead \(em local-only,
filesystem-permission-controlled, and ideal behind an nginx/socat front. A Unix socket
counts as loopback for the control gate.
.TP
.B allow
Array of CIDRs. When non-empty, only these source IPs may reach the endpoint (read and
control); everything else gets 403. Empty (default) allows all. Unix-socket clients are
always allowed. This is a coarse guard, not authentication \(em pair it with a Unix
socket or an authenticating reverse proxy for real protection.
.TP
.B socket_mode
Octal permission string for a Unix-socket bind (e.g. \fB"0660"\fR, \fB"0666"\fR). Empty
uses \fB0660\fR. Loosen it (e.g. \fB"0666"\fR) when a reverse proxy in another container
must reach the socket across a uid boundary.
.PP
.RS
The diagnostics endpoint is BEST-EFFORT: if it cannot bind (a missing or non-writable
socket directory, a stale socket, a permission error on a shared reverse-proxy path) the
daemon logs a warning and keeps running. \fBLosing diagnostics never affects DNS
service.\fR
.RE
.TP
.B allow_control
Boolean. Master switch for the mutating control actions (flush the answer cache, force
a Cloudflare mirror refresh, restart the daemon). Default \fBfalse\fR \(em the endpoint
is read-only. The actions are POST-only, CSRF-guarded (cross-site browser requests are
rejected via \fBSec-Fetch-Site\fR), and rate-limited (\fBrefresh-mirror\fR/\fBrestart\fR
once per 10s). They are authorized either by a matching \fBcontrol_password\fR or \(em
when no password is set \(em ONLY on a loopback bind (a hostname or wildcard bind counts
as non-loopback; only a literal loopback IP qualifies). \fBallow_control\fR on a
non-loopback address with no password leaves the control route unregistered (logged
loudly) so dangerous actions are never exposed unauthenticated on the LAN. Note: the
endpoint is plain HTTP, so a password guards against casual/CSRF misuse, not a network
eavesdropper \(em bind to loopback or front it with TLS/auth for stronger protection.
.TP
.B control_password ", " control_password_file
The control-action password (the \fB_file\fR form reads it from a 0400 file and wins
when both are set). Sent as the \fBX-Diag-Password\fR header or a \fBpassword\fR form
field, compared in constant time. Empty (default) means no password \(em controls are
then honored only on a loopback bind.
.SH "[cache]"
.TP
.B dir
Directory for the versioned-JSON warm-start cache. Default \fB"/var/lib/splitdns"\fR.
.TP
.B answers
Boolean. Enable the forward-path answer cache: forwarded (non-local) responses are
cached by TTL so repeat lookups are answered locally instead of re-querying upstream.
NXDOMAIN/NODATA are negatively cached from the SOA minimum (RFC 2308), brief failures
are cached to spare a flapping upstream (RFC 9520), and TTLs are floored at 5s and
capped at 24h. Authoritative/local answers are never cached. Default \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
.B serve_stale
Boolean. When an entry has expired \fIand\fR the upstream is failing, keep answering
from the stale copy (with a short 30s TTL, retained up to 24h) instead of returning
SERVFAIL \(em the fail-static behavior (RFC 8767). Default \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
.B max_entries
Integer. LRU capacity of the answer cache. Default \fB10000\fR.
.SH "[encrypted]"
Opt-in encrypted client front-end: DNS-over-TLS (RFC 7858) and DNS-over-HTTPS
(RFC 8484) listeners that reuse the same query pipeline as \fB:53\fR (so they inherit the
\fB[access]\fR policy, the answer cache, and the rebinding filter), plus Discovery of
Designated Resolvers advertising (RFC 9462). Disabled by default. A missing or unparsable
certificate degrades to Do53-only rather than taking the daemon down (fail-closed).
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean. Master switch. Default \fBfalse\fR.
.TP
.B cert_file\fR, \fBkey_file
PEM certificate chain and private key for the ADN. Use a publicly-trusted certificate
whose SAN is the ADN. The key should be mode \fB0400 splitdns:splitdns\fR. Both are
required when enabled; they are parsed and expiry-checked at startup (and by
\fB\-check\-config\fR), and hot-reloaded on \fBSIGHUP\fR or file change.
.TP
.B adn
The Authentication Domain Name a client validates the TLS certificate against. It
\fImust\fR resolve to this resolver's LAN addresses (the daemon answers it authoritatively
via split-horizon). Required when enabled.
.TP
.B mode\fR, \fBaddresses
Bind selection, mirroring \fB[listen]\fR. Empty \fBmode\fR inherits \fB[listen].mode\fR;
\fB"explicit"\fR requires \fBaddresses\fR. Default binds only local-scope addresses.
.TP
.B advertise_ddr
Boolean. Synthesize the SVCB designation at \fB_dns.resolver.arpa\fR so DDR-capable
clients auto-upgrade. Advertised only while a valid certificate is loaded. Default
\fBtrue\fR.
.TP
.B ipv4_hint\fR, \fBipv6_hint
Override the DDR address hints (and the ADN's A/AAAA). Empty uses the encrypted
listeners' own bound addresses.
.TP
.B [encrypted.dot]
\fBenabled\fR (default \fBtrue\fR) and \fBport\fR (default \fB853\fR) for the DoT listener.
.TP
.B [encrypted.doh]
\fBenabled\fR (default \fBtrue\fR), \fBport\fR (default \fB443\fR), and \fBpath\fR
(default \fB"/dns-query"\fR) for the DoH listener.
.SH EXAMPLE
A fully annotated example appears in
.IR /usr/share/doc/splitdnsd/splitdnsd.example.toml .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR splitdnsd (8),
.BR splitdns-notify (8)
.SH AUTHORS
The splitdns authors.
